# How to generate samples of a continuous random variable 

- Usin sam les of a continuous uniform variable over 0 1 

- ( g p [ _,_ ]) 

13 / 24 

## Our aim: Obtain samples from a continuous random variable 

▶ Suppose you have access to samples from a uniform random variable _U_ over will not how to support [0 _,_ 1].(We study generate such samples.) 

- Consider a continuous random variable _X_ with support set _X_ and let _F x_ denotes its cdf. _X_ ( ) 

- Support set of _X_ could be arbitrary. 

- Our aim: Create i.i.d. samples of r.v. _X_ using i.i.d. samples of _U_ . 

- We shall again see the inverse transform method to do this. 

14 / 24 

Sampling from continuous random variables Lemma _Let U be uniform random variable over . Consider_ [0 _,_ 1] _continuous r.v. X with cdf F . . Consider a random variable X_[ˆ] _X_ ( ) _as follows defined_ ˆ _X_ := _F[−]_[1] _X_[(] _[U]_[)] _Then the cdf of X_[ˆ] _is F . . X_ ( ) a **Proof:** ˆ ▶ Consider the cdf of _X_[ˆ] , i.e., _FX_ ( _x_ ) := P[ _X_[ˆ] _≤ x_ ]. Then ˆ _F x_ P _F[−]_[1] _X_ ( ) = [ _X_[(] _[U]_[)] _[ ≤][x]_[]] = P[ _U ≤ FX_ ( _x_ )] = _FX_ ( _x_ ) 

15 / 24 

Sampling from continuous random variables Lemma _Let U be uniform random variable over . Consider continuous_ [0 _,_ 1] _r.v. X with cdf FX_ ( _._ ) _. Consider a random variable X_[ˆ] _defined as follows_ ˆ _X_ := _F[−]_[1] _X_[(] _[U]_[)] _Then the cdf of X_[ˆ] _is F . . X_ ( ) oe ▶ Using this lemma, how to generate samples of a continuous random variable _X_ using samples _U_ ? ▶ **Answer:** Draw _u ∼ U_ and obtain _F[−]_[1][This][is][a][sample] _X_[(] _[u]_[).] from _X_[ˆ] which has same distribution as _X_ . ▶ `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse_transform_ sampling` ▶ Do you observe anything “special” about this lemma? 

16 / 24 

## Application in data analysis 

▶ Lemma: _X_[ˆ] = _F[−]_[1][has][distribution] _[F][X]_[(] _[.]_[).] _X_[(] _[U]_[)] 

- What will be cdf of a random variable _Y_ = _F X_ **Uniform!** _X_ ([ˆ] )? 

- A of this lemma is that _F X_ is a uniform consequence _X_ ( ) 

- distribution. 

- This property is known as “probability integral transform or universality of uniform”. 

- This property is used to test whether a set of observations can be modelled as from a distribution _G ._ or arising specified ( ) 

- not. 

17 / 24 

## Evaluating Integrals via Monte Carlo approach 

- 1 

- ▶ Suppose you want to compute _θ_ = R0 _[g]_[(] _[x]_[)] _[dx]_[using][only] from _U_ How will do it ? 

- samples [0 _,_ 1]. you 

- _θ_ = _E U_ [ _g_ ( )]. 

- Use iid samples of _U_ and invoke strong law of large numbers (SLLN). 

= Suppose _Xi_ are iid, and _Sn_[P] _[n] i_ =1 _[X][i]_[.] Then _[S] n[n] → E_ [ _X_ ]. 

## ▶ as _n →∞_ we have 

**==> picture [259 x 56] intentionally omitted <==**

. 

- _b ∞_ 

- ▶ HW: How will you compute R _a[g]_[(] _[x]_[)] _[dx]_[or] R0 _[g]_[(] _[x]_[)] _[dx]_[?] 

18 / 24 

## Importance Sampling 

- Suppose you want to compute _E_ [ _h_ ( _X_ )] where _X_ has pdf _f_ ( _·_ ). 

- Assume you do not have samples from _X_ but know _f_ ( _·_ ). 

- Now have access to from random suppose you samples _·_ 

- variable _Y_ with pdf _g_ ( ). 

- How will you use i.i.d samples of _Y_ to compute _E_ [ _h_ ( _X_ )] ? 

**==> picture [335 x 179] intentionally omitted <==**

- Now use LLN and samples of _Y_ to estimate _E_ [ _h_ ( _X_ )]. 

19 / 24 

