## RECAP 

## ▶ Inverse transform method 

- _F X_ is Uniform! _X_ ( ) 

- Importance Sampling 

3 / 31 

## Accept Reject method 

- Suppose you want to generate samples from _X_ with pmf _p_ ( _·_ ) _·_ 

- using samples from _Y_ with pmf _q_ ( ). 

▶ Suppose that _[p]_[(] _[y]_[)] _[≤][c]_[for][all] _[y]_[.] _q_ ( _y_ ) 

- The method is as follows: accept reject 

- 1: Generate a _∼ ·_ 

- Step sample _y q_ ( ). 

▶ 2: Generate _u ∼U_ Step (0 _,_ 1). 

▶ Step 3: If _u ≤[p]_[(] _[y]_[)][accept] _[y]_[as][a][sample][from] _[X]_[.] _cq_ ( _y_ )[,] ▶ Step 4: If not, reject _y_ and go back to Step 1. 

4 / 31 

## Accept Reject method 

## ▶ Why does the method work ? 

- What is _P_ ( _y /accept_ ) ? is it _p_ ( _y_ ) ? 

5 / 31 

## Proof of Accept-Reject Method 

- To prove that the method produces samples from _p_ ( _·_ ), we will _·_ 

- the of a from 

- compute probability accepting sample _y q_ ( ). 

- The probability of accepting _y_ is given by: 

**==> picture [417 x 57] intentionally omitted <==**

since _u ∼U_ (0 _,_ 1). 

- Thus, the joint probability of sampling _y ∼ q_ ( _·_ ) and accepting it is: 

**==> picture [479 x 58] intentionally omitted <==**

6 / 31 

## Proof (cont’d) 

- The marginal probability of accepting any sample (i.e., normalizing constant) is: 

**==> picture [558 x 57] intentionally omitted <==**

- The conditional of a probability accepting particular sample _y_ 

- given that the sample was accepted is: 

**==> picture [568 x 69] intentionally omitted <==**

- Therefore, the accepted samples are distributed according to _·_ that the method works. 

- _p_ ( ), proving 

7 / 31 

## Stochastic Simulation 

- This was a brief introduction to this area of stochastic simulation. 

- Refer the book Simulation by Sheldon Ross! 

- Some popular techniques in simulation are: 

- ▶ The inverse transform method 

   - Accept-Reject method (rejection sampling) 

   - Importance sampling 

   - Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods 

      - Hasting-Metropolis algorithm 

      - Gibbs sampling 

      - Slice sampling 

8 / 31 

# Convergence of Random Variables 

8 / 31 

## Pointwise Convergence 

- When do we say that _{xn}_ converges to _x ∈_ R ? 

We say that _{xn}_ converges to _x ∈_ R (denoted by _xn → x_ ) if for every _ϵ >_ 0, we can find an _N_ ( _ϵ_ ) _∈_ N such that for _|xn − x | < ϵ_ for _n > N_ ( _ϵ_ ). 

- What about of functions? convergence 

- When do we that a of functions _F ·_ say sequence _n_ ( ) converge 

- _·_ 

- to _F_ ( ) on the domain R? 

_·_ We that the of function _F_ say sequence _n_ ( ) converge _·_ to _F_ if the _F x_ to ( ) pointwise sequence _{ n_ ( ) _}_ converges _F_ ( _x_ ) ( _Fn_ ( _x_ ) _→ F_ ( _x_ )) for all _x ∈_ R. 

9 / 31 

## Uniform Convergence 

_·_ We that the of function _F_ to say sequence _n_ ( ) converge _· F_ if the _F x_ to _F x_ ( ) pointwise sequence _{ n_ ( ) _}_ converges ( ) ( _Fn_ ( _x_ ) _→ F_ ( _x_ )) for all _x ∈_ R. 

- For every _x_ , the sequence _{Fn_ ( _x_ ) _}_ coverges to _F_ ( _x_ ). 

- For every _ϵ,_ there exists _N_ ( _ϵ, x_ ) which can depend on _x_ . 

- Only those _Fn_ ( _x_ ) are _ϵ_ close to _F_ ( _x_ ) for which _n > N_ ( _ϵ, x_ ). 

= If _N_ ( _ϵ, x_ ) _N_ ( _ϵ_ ) (i.e., independent of _x_ ) for every _x ∈_ R _, · ·_ then such of _F_ to _F_ is called as uniform convergence _n_ ( ) ( ) convergence. 

10 / 31 

## Convergence of Sequence of random variables 

▶ We will now be interested in the of an convergence properties of random variables _X_ to some infinite sequence _{ n}_ limiting random variable _X_ . 

- What does the _X → X_ even mean ? convergence _n_ 

- When you perform the random experiment once, you get a 

   - of realizations _x_ and _x_ . 

   - sequence _{ n}_ 

- If are _x → x_ . you ’lucky’, maybe _n_ 

- But if were to the not you perform experiment again, you may 

- be so ’lucky’ and get a different sequence _{xn[′][}]_[which][may][not] converge to _x[′]_ . 

- We will come up with notions of convergence that depend on how often see the of realizations you sequence converging. 

11 / 31 

## Convergence of Sequence of random variables 

- of _X → X_ 

- Convergence _n_ 

- Here _X_ could even be a deterministic number. 

- _X[′]_[could][be][dependent][on][each][other.] _n[s]_ 

- Each random variable _X_ could have a law _n_ different 

- (pmf/pdf). 

12 / 31 

## Modes of _X → X_ Convergence ( _n_ ) 

## Pointwise or Sure convergence 

   - _{Xn, n ≥_ 0 _}_ converges to _X_ pointwise or surely if for all _ω ∈_ Ωwe have lim _n→∞ Xn_ ( _ω_ ) = _X_ ( _ω_ ) 

- Consider Ω= _H T_ . _{ , }_ 

1 = = if _ω H_ 0 if _ω H n_ ▶ Further, _Xn_ = _[X]_[=] = = 1 +[1] if _ω T ._[and] 1 if _ω T ._ ( _n_ ( 

13 / 31 

