## Almost sure convergence 

## _X_ to _X_ almost if _n_ converges surely 

**==> picture [670 x 68] intentionally omitted <==**

- The set of outcomes where the convergence does not happen = 

- has measure 0. _P{ω ∈_ Ω: lim _n→∞ Xn_ ( _ω_ ) _̸ X_ ( _ω_ ) _}_ = 0 _._ 

- ▶ Consider where a number in Ω= [0 _,_ 1] you pick uniformly 

- [0 _,_ 1]. Let _Xn_ ( _ω_ ) = _ω[n]_ for all _ω ∈_ Ωand _X_ ( _ω_ ) = 0 for all _ω_ . 

- _Xn_ ( _ω_ ) _→ X_ ( _ω_ ) for _ω ∈_ [0 _,_ 1). 

- _X ω_ ↛ _X ω_ for _ω_ = 1 and P _ω_ = 1 . _n_ ( ) ( ) _{ }_ 

- This is almost sure as P = 1. convergence _{_ [0 _,_ 1) _}_ 

14 / 31 

## Almost sure (a.s.) convergence 

## _X_ to _X_ almost if _n_ converges surely 

   - _P_ ( _ω ∈_ Ω: lim _n→∞ Xn_ ( _ω_ ) = _X_ ( _ω_ )) = 1 _._ 

- Example 2: Strong law of large numbers (SLLN). 

Let _{Xn, n ≥_ 0 _}_ denote a sequence of i.i.d random vari= ables with mean and denote _S_[P] _[n]_ Then _µ n i_ =1 _[X][i]_[.] _Sn_[a.s.] _n[→][µ]_ 

- Toss a biased coin (probability of head is _µ_ ) repeatedly. What is _ω_ and Ω? 

- Let _X_ denote the outcome of the _i[th]_ toss and _S_ denotes the _i n_ 

- number of heads in _n_ tosses. 

- The empirical mean is given by _[S][n] n_[.] 

15 / 31 

## Detour: Incremental formula for mean sample 

- Now that we know _[S][n]_[we][can][use] _[µ]_[ˆ] _[n][S][n]_[an][:=] 

- _n[→][µ] n_[as] 

- ’estimator’ for the mean especially in cases when the underlying distribution is not known. 

- Note that the estimator ˆ is a random variable. What is its _µn_ 

- cdf? what is its mean & Variance? 

- ˆ 

- ▶ = _[S][n]_[an][’unbiased][estimator’][since] _[E]_[[ ˆ] _[µ][n]_[] =] _[ µ.] µn n_[is] 

- _Var[σ]_[2] ( ˆ _µn_ ) = _n_ 

- We will soon see CLT that will tell the CDF of ˆ without _µn_ any 

- information on the law of _X_ . _i_ 

16 / 31 

## Detour: Incremental formula for mean sample 

▶ Now given _µ_ ˆ _n_ , suppose you see an additional sample _Xn_ +1. 

- How will ˆ ? you compute _µn_ +1 

**==> picture [320 x 45] intentionally omitted <==**

- There is an incremental formula that uses ˆ . _µn_ 

**==> picture [623 x 75] intentionally omitted <==**

- Such averaging formulas are used extensively in Reinforcement learning. 

17 / 31 

## Recap: Modes of Convergence 

- _{Xn, n ≥_ 0 _}_ converges to _X_ pointwise or surely if for all _ω ∈_ Ωwe have lim _n→∞ Xn_ ( _ω_ ) = _X_ ( _ω_ ) 

_X_ to _X_ almost if _n_ converges surely _P_ ( _ω ∈_ Ω: lim _n→∞ Xn_ ( _ω_ ) = _X_ ( _ω_ )) = 1 _._ 

- _{Xn, n ≥_ 0 _}_ is a sequence of i.i.d random variables with mean = 

- and _S_[P] _[n]_[Then] _[µ]_[ˆ] _[n][S][n]_[a.s.][(SLLN)] 

- _µ n i_ =1 _[X][i]_[.][:=] _n[→][µ]_ 

▶ Estimator ˆ has mean and Variance _[σ]_[2] _µn µ n_[.] 

ˆ ˆ 1 ▶ = _µn_ +1 _µn_ + _n_ +1[[] _[X][n]_[+1] _[ −][µ]_[ˆ] _[n]_[]] 

18 / 31 

## Borel Cantelli Lemma 

**==> picture [670 x 213] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Self-Study: Theorem 7.5 (probabilitycourse.com)<br> X  X . If for all<br>Consider a sequence of random variables 1 , 2 , . . .<br>ϵ we have<br>∞<br>P P ( |Xn − X | > ϵ )  < ∞<br>n =1<br>then X → X a.s.<br>n<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


- This is a condition for almost sure only sufficient convergence! 

- Thm 7.6 and conditions. (HW) gives necessary sufficient 

- Lot of problems in probabilitycourse, practice them! 

19 / 31 

## Another of a.s. example convergence 

▶ Consider a uniform r.v. _U_ and _X_ = _n_ 1 1 _n_ define _{U≤ n[}]_[.] 

▶ _Xn_ = _n_ when _U ≤_[1] _[X][n]_[= 0][otherwise.] _n_[and] 

- Given a realization of _U_ , what can you say about the _X_ ? 

- sequence _{ n}_ 

- Once an _Xn_ is zero, all higher indexed variables are also zero! 

▶ This happens for all realizations _U_ other than _U_ = 0 _._ In this case since 0 _≤ n_[1][for][all] _[n][,][X] n[ ′][s]_[run][off][to][infinity][and][we][don’t] see to 0. convergence 

- But _P_ ( _U_ = 0) = 0. 

- Does _E X →_ 0 ? [ _n_ ] 

- Almost sure convergence does not imply their means converge! 

20 / 31 

- Towards convergence in probability ▶ Now _X_ = _n_ 1 1 _[{][U][n][}]_[are][i.i.d][uniform.] _n_ 

- define _{Un≤ n[}]_[where] 

   - _Xn_ = _n_ when _Un ≤_[1] _[X][n]_[= 0][otherwise.] _n_[and] 

   - What can about the _X_ ? you say sequence _{ n}_ 

   - Is it true that once an _Xn_ is zero, all higher indexed variables are also zero!? No! 

   - time run of the or 

   - Every (on every experiment every sample path), we will have a sequence of zero and non-zero values, where the non-zero values become rarer and rarer but will keep happening once in a while. 

   - On no sample path would you see convergence to zero but occurrence of non-zero values become rare. 

   - We now characterize this notion of convergence. 

21 / 31 

## Convergence in probability (w.h.p) 

## _X_ to _X_ in if _n_ converges probability 

lim _n→∞ P_ ( _|Xn − X | > ϵ_ ) = 0 for all _ϵ >_ 0 _._ 

- How would you compute _P_ ( _|Xn − X | > ϵ_ ) when _Xn, X_ are either continuous or discrete random variables ? 

▶ Ex: _X_ = _n_ with[1] _[X][n]_[otherwise.] _n_ probability[= 0] _n_[and] ▶ _P_ ( _|Xn − X | > ϵ_ ) = _P_ ( _Xn > ϵ_ ) = _n_[1][when] _[n][ > ϵ]_[.] ▶ When _n < ϵ,_ we have _P_ ( _|Xn − X | > ϵ_ ) = 0. 

▶ Once _n > ϵ_ we have lim _n→∞ P_ ( _Xn > ϵ_ ) = lim _n→∞ n_[1][= 0.] ▶ _X_ to 0 in but not almost . _n_ converges probability, surely ▶ a.s. in convergence implies convergence probability 

22 / 31 

