## in _r[th]_ mean Convergence 

## _X_ to _X_ in _r[th]_ mean if _n_ converges 

lim _E X X n→∞_ [ _| n − |[r]_ ] = 0. 

- How will _E X X_ you compute [ _| n − |[r]_ ]? 

- When _r_ = 2 it is in mean sense. In _,_ convergence squared 

- addition if _X_ = 0 it that the second moments _,_ implies 

- to 0. 

- converge 

- In the convergence in probability example, do we have in mean or mean 

- convergence square? 

- in _r[th]_ mean in 

- Convergence implies convergence probability. 

23 / 31 

## Weak convergence (in distribution) 

## _X_ to _X_ in distribution if _n_ converges 

_·_ lim _F x F x_ for all of _F n→∞ Xn_ ( ) = _X_ ( ) continuity points _X_ ( ). 

- a.s. convergence and convergence in probability imply in distribution. 

- convergence 

- _X_ is an random variable with 

- Example: _n_ exponential 

   - parameter _λn_ . 

- In this case, _FXn_ ( _x_ ) = 1 _− e[−][n][λ][x]_ and _FX_ ( _x_ ) = 1 for all _x_ . 

- Note _x_ = 0 is of as _F_ and point discontinuity _X_ (0) = 1 

- _F Xn_ (0) = 0. 

- HW EX2: _X_ are i.i.d _n[λ]_[It][converges][in] _n_ Binomial( _, n_[).] 

- distribution to Poisson( _λ_ ). 

24 / 31 

## Summary 

`https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convergence_of_random_ variables` 

25 / 31 

## Relation between modes of convergence (no proofs) 

`https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proofs_of_convergence_ of_random_variables` 

26 / 31 

## Towards CLT 

ˆ ▶ Recall = _[S][n][S][n]_[P] _[n] µn n_[where][=] _i_ =1 _[X][i]_ 

▶ _X_ is i.i.d. with mean amnd variance _σ_[2] . _{ i } µ_ 

- _E_ and _var[σ]_[2] [ˆ _µn_ ] = _µ_ (ˆ _µn_ ) = _n_ 

▶ Now consider _Yn_ = _[µ]_[ˆ] _[n]_ ~~_σ_~~ _[−][µ]_ (centering and scaling). What is ~~_√_~~ _n_[.] the mean and variance of _Y_ ? _n_ 

- _E Y_ and _Var Y_ What is _F ·_ [ _n_ ] = 0 ( _n_ ) = 1. _Yn_ ( )? 

▶ What is lim _F ·_ ? ANS: _· F · n→∞ Yn_ ( ) Φ( ) = _N_ (0 _,_ 1)( ) 

- In other words, _Yn_ converges to _Y_ = _N_ (0 _,_ 1) in distribution. 

27 / 31 

## CLT 

Let _{Xn, n ≥_ 0 _}_ denote a sequence of i.i.d random variables ˆ each with mean _µ_ and variance 0 _< σ_[2] _< ∞_ .Denote _µn_ = P _ni_ =1 _[X][i]_ = and _Yn[µ]_[ˆ] _[n]_ ~~_σ_~~ _[−][µ]_[Then] _[Y][n]_[converges][to] _[N]_[(0] _[,]_[ 1)][in] _n_ ~~_√_~~ _n_[.] distribution. 

- _X_ could be ANY discrete or continuous r.v. with mean _i_ finite 

- and variance. 

- What is the when _E X_ and _Var X ._ consequence [ _i_ ] = 0 ( _i_ ) = 1 

- In this case, _Yn_ = _[S][n]_[it][converges][in][distribution][to] _n_[and] 

- ~~_√_~~ 

- _N_ (0 _,_ 1). 

▶ _Sn_[almost][surely][to][0][but] _[S][n]_[to][a] _n_[converges] _n_[converges] ~~_√_~~ random variable _N_ (0 _,_ 1). 

28 / 31 

## CLT 

Let _{Xn, n ≥_ 0 _}_ denote a sequence of i.i.d random variables ˆ = each with mean _µ_ and variance 0 _< σ_[2] _< ∞_ .Denote _µn_ P _ni_ =1 _[X][i]_ = and _Yn[µ]_[ˆ] _[n]_ ~~_σ_~~ _[−][µ]_[Then] _[Y][n]_[converges][to] _[N]_[(0] _[,]_[ 1)][in] _n_ ~~_√_~~ _n_[.] distribution. 

- CLT a to disribution of ˆ . given way find approximate _µn_ 

- Note that for large enough _n_ , we can use the approximation that _Yn ∼N_ (0 _,_ 1). 

▶ Since Gaussianity is preserved under affine transformation, _µ_ ˆ _n ∼N_ ( _µ,[σ] n_[2][)] 

29 / 31 

## Example from probabilitycourse.com 

30 / 31 

## Normal Approximation based on CLT 

▶ Let _S_ = _X . . . X_ where _X_ are i.i.d. with mean and _n_ 1 + _n i µ_ variance _σ_[2] . If _n_ is CDF of _S_ can be as large, _n_ approximated follows. 

= _P_ ( _Sn < c_ ) _≈_ Φ( _z_ ) where _z[c][−][n][µ] σ_ ~~_[√]_~~ _n_ 

## `https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zeJD6dqJ5lo&t=111s` 

31 / 31 

