## Markov Chains 

19 / 36 

## Introduction to Stochastic processes 

- Stochastic _X t t ∈ T_ is a collection of random process _{_ ( ) _, }_ 

- variables defined such that for every _t ∈ T_ we have _X_ ( _t_ ) : Ω _→S_ . 

- These random variables could be dependent and need not have identical distribution. 

- _T_ is the resembles and _S_ is the parameter space (often time) 

- state space. 

- When _T_ is countable, we have a discrete time process. 

- If _T_ is a subset of real line, we have a continuous time process. 

- State could be or real numbers space integers 

20 / 36 

## Examples of Stochastic Processes 

- _X_ of i.i.d random variables. 

- Sequence _{ i }_ 

- General random walk: If _X X_ is a i.i.d of 1 _,_ 2 _, . . ._ sequence = 

- random variables, then _Sn_[P] _[n] i_ =1 _[X][i]_[is][a][random][walk.] 

- ▶ 1D Random walks can have positive, negative or no drift depending on the sign of _E_ [ _X_ ]. 

- A trajectory of 2D random walk 

`https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f3/Random_walk_` 

21 / 36 

## Examples of Stochastic Processes 

▶ Weiner process: _{X_ ( _t_ ) _, t ≥_ 0 _}_ is a Weiner process if 1. for _t >_ 0 _X t ∼N t_ every _,_ ( ) (0 _,_ ). 

2. Often called as Brownian Motion as it was used by Robert Brown to describe motion of particle suspended in liquid. 

3. It is a scaling limit of a random walk (zoomed out BM). 4. Trajectories are continuous but not differntiable (Financial modeling) 

5. Limit of Functional CLT (CLT for Stochastic processes) 

22 / 36 

## Examples of Stochastic Processes 

▶ Gaussian Process: A continuous time stochastic process _{Xt, t ∈ T }_ is a gausssian process if and only if for any finite set of indices _t_ 1 _, . . . tk_ , [ _Xt_ 1 _, . . . , Xtk_ ] is a multivariate Gaussian vector. 

- _{Xn, n ≥_ 0 _}_ is a martingale if _E_ [ _Xn_ +1 _|X_ 1 _, . . . , Xn_ )] = _Xn_ . (Applications in Finance, Optimal Stopping, pricing) 

23 / 36 

## Discrete time Markov Chains (DTMC) 

- A stochastic process _{Xn, n ∈_ Z+ _}_ is a discrete time Markov chain if for _n_ we have any 

**==> picture [623 x 64] intentionally omitted <==**

- This is called as the Markov property. 

- _P next state states state_ ( _|past , present_ ) = 

- _P_ ( _next state| present state_ ) 

▶ Why Chain? You can view the successive random variables as a chain of states visited in a and where the being sequence next state visited depends only on the current state. 

- We will assume that the state _S_ is throughout space 

- countable. 

24 / 36 

## Running example: Coin with memory! 

- In a Markovian coin with memory, the outcome of the next toss depends on the current toss. 

- _Xn_ = 1 for heads and _Xn_ = _−_ 1 otherwise. _S_ = _{_ +1 _, −_ 1 _}_ . 

- coin : _P X_ = 1 _X ._ 9 and 

- Sticky ( _n_ +1 _| n_ = 1) = 0 _P X_ = _−_ 1 _X_ = _− ._ 8 for all _n_ . ( _n_ +1 _| n_ 1) = 0 

- Coin: _P X_ = 1 _X ._ 1 while 

- Flippy ( _n_ +1 _| n_ = 1) = 0 = = 

- _P X −_ 1 _X − ._ 3 for all _n_ . ( _n_ +1 _| n_ 1) = 0 

- This can be represented by a transition diagram (see board) 

**==> picture [649 x 90] intentionally omitted <==**

- The row corresponds to present state and the column corresponds to next state. 

25 / 36 

## Running example: Dice with memory! 

▶ In a markovian dice with the outcome of the next roll memory, depends on the current roll. 

▶ _Xn_ = _i_ for _i ∈S_ where _S_ = _{_ 1 _, . . . ,_ 6 _}_ . 

|▶_Xn_ =_i_ fo|r _i ∈S_ w|here _S_ =|_{_1_, . . . ,_6_}_.|
|---|---|---|---|
|▶Example|one-step|transition|probability matrix|
|_P_ =<br><br><br>0_._9<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>0_._1|_._1<br>0<br>_._9<br>_._1<br>0<br>0_._9<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>0|0<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>0_._1<br>0<br>0_._9<br>0_._1<br>0<br>0_._9<br>0<br>0|0<br>0<br>0<br>0<br>0_._1<br>0_._9<br><br>|



- State transition diagram on board 

ˆ ▶ Consider _S_ =[P] _[n][µ]_[ˆ] _[n][S][n]_ What is lim ? _n i_ =1 _[X][i]_[and][=] _n_[.] _n→∞ µn_ 

- Cannot invoke SLLN as _X_ are not i.i.d. _{ i }_ 

- We will see later SLLN for Markov chains! 

26 / 36 

## Finite dimensional distributions 

- Consider a Markov dice with transition probability _P_ . 

- What is _P X_ = 4 _X_ = 5 _X_ ( 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 = 6)? 

- = _P X_ = 6 _X_ = 5 _X P X_ = 5 _X P X_ ( 2 _|_ 1 _,_ 0 = 4) ( 1 _|_ 0 = 4) ( 0 = 4) 

- = _P X p_ 65 _p_ 54 ( 0 = 4). 

- What is _P X_ ( 0 = 4)? 

- This probability of starting in a particular state is called initial distribution of the markov chain. 

27 / 36 

## Finite dimensional distributions 

- Consider a DTMC _{Xn, n ≥_ 0 _}_ with transition matrix _P_ . 

- We assume _M_ states and _X_ denotes the initial state. 0 

- You can start in state or any starting may pick your starting 

- state randomly. 

- Let _µ_ ¯ = ( _µ_ 1 _, . . . , µM_ ) denote the initial distribution, i.e., 

   - = 

   - _P_ ( _X_ 0 _x_ 0) = _µx_ 0. 

- How does one obtain the dimensional distribution finite 

- _P X_ = _x X_ = _x X_ = _x_ ? ( 0 0 _,_ 1 1 _, ,_ 2 2) 

- _P X_ = _x X_ = _x X_ = _x_ . ( 0 0 _,_ 1 1 _, ,_ 2 2) = _px_ 1 _,x_ 2 _px_ 0 _,x_ 1 _µx_ 0 

- In general, 

_P X_ = _x X_ = _x X_ = _x × . . . ×_ ( 0 0 _,_ 1 1 _, . . . k k_ ) = _pxk−_ 1 _,xk px_ 0 _,x_ 1 _µx_ 0 

28 / 36 

