## Chapman Kolmogorov Equations for DTMC 

**==> picture [628 x 90] intentionally omitted <==**

▶ Given _X_ 0 = 1, what is _P_ ( _X_ 2 = 1)? 

   - _P_ ( _X_ 2 = 1 _|X_ 0 = 1) = _P_ ( _X_ 2 = 1 _|X_ 1 = 1 _, X_ 0 = 1) _P_ ( _X_ 1 = 1 _|X_ 0 = 1) + _P_ ( _X_ 2 = 1 _|X_ 1 = _−_ 1 _, X_ 0 = 1) _P_ ( _X_ 1 = _−_ 1 _|X_ 0 = 1) = _p_ 1[2] _,_ 1[+] _[ p] −_ 1 _,_ 1 _[p]_ 1 _,−_ 1 

- Here the first inequality follow from the fact that 

   - _P_ ( _C |A_ ) = _P_ ( _C |BA_ ) _P_ ( _B|A_ ) + _P_ ( _C |B[c] A_ ) _P_ ( _B[c] |A_ ) HW: Verify 

- _P X_ = _−_ 1 _X P X_ = 1 _X_ = _− P X_ = 

- Similarly, ( 2 _|_ 0 = 1) _,_ ( 2 _|_ 0 1) _,_ ( 2 _−_ 1 _|X_ 0 = _−_ 1) can be obtained and these are elements of a two-step transition matrix _P_[(2)] . 

29 / 36 

## Chapman Kolmogorov Equations for DTMC 

**==> picture [629 x 95] intentionally omitted <==**

- This implies that _P_[(2)] = _P × P_ = _P_[2] . 

- In _P_[(] _[n]_[)] = _P[n]_ . general, 

- Chapman-Kolmogorov equations are a further generalization of this. 

**==> picture [623 x 66] intentionally omitted <==**

## ▶ We wont see the proof of this. 

30 / 36 

## RECAP 

## ▶ Markov property: 

_P_ ( _Xn_ = _j|X_ 1 = _x_ 1 _, .., Xn−_ 1 = _xn−_ 1) = _P_ ( _Xn_ = _j|Xn−_ 1 = _xn−_ 1) 

- You need ¯ and _P_ do write down the _µ_ = ( _µ_ 1 _, . . . , µM_ ) t.p.m 

- dimensional distributions 

- finite 

_P X_ = _x X_ = _x X_ = _x_ = _× . . . ×_ ( 0 0 _,_ 1 1 _, . . . k k_ ) _pxk−_ 1 _,xk_ 

_px_ 0 _,x_ 1 _µx_ 0 

- Chapman Kolmogorov Equations tell us that the n-step t.p.m is just _P[n] ._ 

31 / 36 

## of states Classification 

- Consider a Markov with state _S_ process space 

- We that is accessible from _i_ if[for][some] _[n]_[.] say _j p[n][>]_[ 0] _ij_ 

- This is denoted _i →_ . by _j_ 

- if _i → j_ and _j → i_ then we say that _i_ and _j_ communicate. This is denoted _i ↔_ . by _j_ 

A chain is said to be irreducible if _i ↔_ for all _i ∈S_ . _j , j_ 

- Are the examples of Markovian coin and dice we have considered till now irreducible? check! 

32 / 36 

## Recurrent and Transient states 

- We say that a state _i_ is recurrent if = 

- _F P_ ever to _i_ started in _i ii_ ( returning having ) = 1. 

▶ _F_ is not to calculate. of this _ii_ easy (Not part course) 

- If a state is not recurrent, it is transient. 

- For a transient state _i_ , _Fii <_ 1. 

- If _i ↔ j_ and _i_ is recurrent, then _j_ is recurrent. 

33 / 36 

## Limiting probabilities 

**==> picture [648 x 148] intentionally omitted <==**

▶ What is the of lim _P[n]_ ? interpretation _n→∞ p_[(] _[n]_[)] = [lim _n→∞_ ] _ij ij_ 

- _α_ = lim denotes the of in state _j n→∞ p_[(] _[n]_[)] probability being _j ij_ 

- after a large time from starting in state _i_ . 

- For an _M_ state DTMC, _α_ = ( _α_ 1 _, . . . , αM_ ) denotes the limiting distribution. 

- How do we obtain the limiting distribution _α_ ? Does it always exist? 

34 / 36 

## Stationary distribution 

The **distribution** of a Markov chain is as **stationary** defined = a solution to the _π πP_ . equation 

- _πP_ is the of _X X_ essentially p.m.f 1 having picked 0 according 

   - to _π._ 

- _π_ = _πP_ says that, if the initial distribution is _π,_ then the distribution of _X_ is also _π_ . 1 

- this the of _X_ for _n_ is _π_ and 

- Continuing argument, p.m.f _n_ any there is no dependence on the starting state. 

- MCMC algorithms use this idea (at stationarity successive states of the Markov chain have p.m.f _π_ ) to sample from distribution _π_ . 

- target 

35 / 36 

## Limiting vs Stationary distribution 

▶ Obtain stationary distribution for the Markov Chain with 0 0 1   = transition probability _P_ 0 0 _._ 6 0 _._ 4 0 _._ 6 0 _._ 4 0   

**==> picture [640 x 120] intentionally omitted <==**

- The limiting distribution if it exists, is same as the stationary = 

- distribution, i.e. _αi πi_ for all _i_ . 

36 / 36 

