## MA 6.101 

## Probability and Statistics 

**Tejas Bodas** Assistant Professor, IIIT Hyderabad 

1 / 38 

## Statistics 

2 / 38 

## Statistical Inference 

- Statistical Inference methods deal with drawing inference about an unknown **random variable** model/ /random process 

- from observations/data. 

- There is an unknown quantity _θ[∗]_ that we would like to estimate using data _D_ . eg: ML, communication systems. 

- For the purpose of this course _D_ will contain samples of a random variable and _θ[∗]_ could be mean, variance, moments or parameters of the underlying random variable. 

- Broadly, you can give 3 types of estimates for _θ[∗]_ . 1. Point Estimation: Here you want to give a point estimate which is a numerical value that is best for _θ[∗]_ . single your guess 

   2. Interval Estimation: here an interval on R where you give say 

   _θ[∗]_ is bound to lie with some certainty. 

   3. Hypothesis testing: In binary hypothesis testing, you have two _H_ : _θ_ = _α_ and _H_ : _θ_ = _α_ and use data _D_ 

   hypothesis ( 0 1 1 2) you to decide which is true. 

3 / 38 

## Statistical Inference 

- There are two approaches to Statistical Inference: 1) Bayesian 2) Frequentist (or classical) 

- In Bayesian Inference, the unknown quantity is modelled as a random variable with a distribution that as keeps changing 

- more and more data becomes available. 

- inference assumes a distribution _θ_ on the 

- Bayesian prior _p_ Θ( ) unknown _θ[∗]_ and uses the likelihood _x θ_ for parameter _pX_ Θ( _|_ ) _|_ 

- observing data _x_ to obtain the posterior _p_ Θ _X_ ( _θ|x_ ) _|_ 

- In Bayesian inference, prior and posterior distribution reflect our state of knowledge. 

4 / 38 

## Frequentist or Classical Inference 

- Classical Inference models the unknown quantity as a constant and come with estimators that are deterministic functions up 

- of the observed data. 

- Given data, these estimators are deterministic functions of the data, but in reality are also random variables. 

- For mean as an estimator for the mean. example sample 

5 / 38 

## Classical Inference: Point Estimation 

- Let _θ[∗]_ denote the unknown parameter of a random variable _X_ (typically mean, variance, scale, shape etc) and suppose we observe i.i.d samples of _X_ which are recorded in the dataset _D_ = _{x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, . . . , xn}_ . 

▶ In frequentist approach, we estimate _θ[∗]_ , by defining a point estimator Θ[ˆ] as a function of the random _X X_ as samples 1 _, . . . n_ ˆΘ = _h X X_ ( 1 _, . . . n_ ). 

- While Θ[ˆ] is a random variable, given _D_ the estimator takes the value Θ =[ˆ] _h x x_ ( 1 _, . . . n_ ). 

_n_ ˆ P _i_ =1 _[X][i]_ ▶ : mean = . Example Sample _µn n_ 

6 / 38 

## Point Estimators: Properties 

- The Bias _B_ (Θ)[ˆ] of an estimator Θ[ˆ] is defined as 

_B_ (Θ) =[ˆ] _E_ [Θ][ˆ] _− θ[∗]_ 

- Unbiased estimators are estimators with zero bias, i.e., _B_ (Θ) = 0[ˆ] and hence _E_ [Θ] =[ˆ] _θ[∗]_ 

▶ Are all unbiased estimators ? Let Θ[ˆ] = _X_ and good 1 1 P _ni_ =1 _[X][i]_ = ˆΘ . Which estimator is better? 2 _n_ 

- _Var_ Θ _σ_[2] while _Var_ Θ _[σ]_[2] ([ˆ] 1) = ([ˆ] 2) = _n_[.] 

- We need other measures to determine how good an estimator is, something that looks at the variance of these estimators. 

7 / 38 

## Mean error of Point Estimators square 

- The mean squared error of an estimator Θ[ˆ] is defined as 

**==> picture [251 x 30] intentionally omitted <==**

- Note that 

**==> picture [416 x 102] intentionally omitted <==**

- This means that biased estimators could possibly have lower MSE error if they have extremely low variance! 

- ˆ 

- ▶ Find MSE of Θ[ˆ] = _X_ and Θ[ˆ] = 1 1 2 _µn_ + 1. 

- Bias-Variance tradeoff talks a lot in machine learning! 

8 / 38 

## Consistency of estimators 

- What happens to estimators as the size of the data set = _n_ increases? Do all estimators to _θ[∗]_ ? 

- ( _|D|_ ) converge 

- Not For Θ[ˆ] = _X_ where _X_ is necessarily! examples 1 _i i_ picked 

- random from _D_ does not converge. 

- What about _µ_ ˆ _n_ . Using SLLN, we see that this does. 

- Let Θ[ˆ] Θ[ˆ] Θ[ˆ] be a of estimators of 1 _,_ 2 _, . . . , n, . . . ,_ sequence point 

- _θ[∗] n_ denotes the size of the We that Θ[ˆ] is (here dataset) say _n_ 

- a **consistent estimator** of _θ,_ if 

lim for all _ϵ >_ 0 _n→∞[P]_[(] _[|]_[ˆΘ] _[n][ −][θ][∗][| ≥][ϵ]_[) = 0] _[,]_ 

- This is in If almost sure convergence probability. convergence 

- holds, it is called strongly consistent. 

- ˆ 

- ▶ Θ[ˆ] = is consistent and hence consistent. Clearly, _n µn_ strongly 

9 / 38 

## RECAP 

- A point estimator Θ[ˆ] is a function of the random samples ˆΘ = _h X X_ ( 1 _, . . . n_ ) 

- The Bias _B_ (Θ)[ˆ] of an estimator Θ[ˆ] is defined as 

_B_ (Θ) =[ˆ] _E_ [Θ][ˆ] _− θ[∗]_ 

- The mean squared error of an estimator Θ[ˆ] is defined as 

**==> picture [251 x 30] intentionally omitted <==**

. 

- _MSE_ (Θ) =[ˆ] _Var_ (Θ) +[ˆ] _Bias_ (Θ)[ˆ][2] 

- We that Θ[ˆ] is a **consistent estimator** of if say _n θ,_ 

lim for all _ϵ >_ 0 _n→∞[P]_[(] _[|]_[ˆΘ] _[n][ −][θ][∗][| ≥][ϵ]_[) = 0] _[,]_ 

10 / 38 

## Markov’s Inequality: Statement 

**Markov’s Inequality:** Let _X_ be a non-negative random variable, and let _a >_ 0. Then: 

P _X a ._ ( _≥_ ) _≤_[E][[] _[X]_[]] _a_ 

## **Key Points:** 

- Applies to **non-negative** random variables. 

- Provides an upper bound on the probability of large deviations. 

- Useful in analyzing tail probabilities. 

11 / 38 

## Proof of Markov’s Inequality 

## **Proof:** 

Let _X_ be a positive continuous random variable. We start by the E _X_ as: writing expectation [ ] 

_∞ ∞_ = E[ _X_ ] = _xfX_ ( _x_ ) _dx xfX_ ( _x_ ) _dx_ (since _X ≥_ 0) _._ Z _−∞_ Z0 For any _a >_ 0, we can split the integral as follows: 

**==> picture [390 x 52] intentionally omitted <==**

Thus, 

_∞_ E[ _X_ ] _≥ xfX_ ( _x_ ) _dx ._ Z _a_ 

12 / 38 

## Proof of Markov’s Inequality (cont’d) 

Since _x ≥ a_ for _x ∈_ [ _a, ∞_ ), we have 

**==> picture [585 x 156] intentionally omitted <==**

both sides _a a >_ we conclude: Dividing by (for 0), 

**==> picture [189 x 51] intentionally omitted <==**

13 / 38 

