## Limits and Continuity 

▶ How do we define limit of a sequence _{a_ 1 _, a_ 2 _, . . . , }_ ? 

▶ Notation: lim _a_ = _L_ . _n→∞ n_ 

▶ How do you define limit of a function at a point c? 

▶ Notation: lim _x L x →c f_ ( ) = 

▶ How do you define continuity of a function _f_ ( _x_ ) at _c_ ? 

▶ When do a function is continuous ? you say 

▶ ( _ϵ, δ_ )-definition of limits and continuity? 

35 / 71 

## Limits and Continuity 

## in terms of limits of Definition sequences. 

_·_ For a continuous function _f_ ( ), as _x → c_ , we have _f_ ( _x_ ) _→ f c_ ( ) 

For a continuous set-function _S_ , as _An → A_ , we have _S A → S A_ ( _n_ ) ( ) 

- Recall that P is a set-function. Is it continuous? 

- We will see the proof shortly. 

36 / 71 

## of sets Sequence 

▶ Given (Ω _, F_ ) _,_ If _A_ 1 _⊂ A_ 2 _. . ._ is an increasing sequence of events defined on _F_ and _∪[∞] n_ =1 _[A][n]_[=] _[ A][ ∈F][,]_[then][we][say][thats] the of sets _A_ are to _A A A_ sequence _n_ increasing ( _n ↑_ ). ▶ Similarly when _A_ 1 _⊃ A_ 2 _. . ._ is a decreasing sequence of events and _∩[∞]_[then][we][have] _[A][n] n_ =1 _[A][n]_[=] _[ A][,][↓][A][.]_ 

▶ Alternative notation: For an of sets _A_ we increasing sequence _n_ often write lim[for] _[∪][∞] n_ =1 _[A][n]_[and][for][a][decreasing][sequence] _n→∞[A][n]_ of sets _A_ that lim _n_[=] _[ ∩][∞] n_ =1 _[A][n][.] n→∞[A][n]_ 

37 / 71 

## Continuity of set-function P 

Lemma _For sequence of events of the type An ↑ A or An ↓ A, we have_ lim _n→∞_[P][(] _[A][n]_[) =][ P][(] _[A]_[)] _[.]_ oo Proof ▶ Consider Similar follow increasing sequence first. arguments for decreasing seq. 

▶ _F_ = _A A − n n − n_ 1 Define 

▶ _∪[∞] n_ =1 _[A][n]_[=] _[ ∪][∞] n_ =1 _[F][n][.]_ 

▶ P( _A_ ) = P( _∪[∞] n_ =1 _[A][n]_[) =][ P][(] _[∪][∞] n_ =1 _[F][n]_[)] ▶ But P( _∪[∞] n_ =1 _[F][n]_[) = lim] _[n][→∞]_ P _ni_ =1 _[P]_[(] _[F][i]_[) = lim] _[n][→∞]_[P][(] _[A][n]_[).] Equivalently if _An →∅_ , then P( _An_ ) _→_ 0. 

38 / 71 

## Conditional probability 

- Given/If dice rolls odd, what is the probability that the outcome is 1? 

- _ω_ ¯ _∈_ 0 _._ what is the that _ω_ ¯ _∈_ 0 _._ 

- Given/If [0 _,_ 5] probability [0 _,_ 25]? 

The conditional probability of event _B_ given event _A_ is defined as P _B A_[P][(] _[A][∩][B]_[)] when P _A >_ 0. ( _/_ ) := P( _A_ ) ( ) 

39 / 71 

## Conditional probability 

- Show that _P_ ( _A/B_ ) _P_ ( _B_ ) = _P_ ( _B/A_ ) _P_ ( _A_ ). 

▶ Bayes rule: _P_ ( _B/A_ ) = _[P]_[(] _[A] P[/][B]_ ( _A_[)] _[P]_ )[(] _[B]_[)] . 

- What is _P A B ∩ C_ .This is also denoted as _P A BC_ ( _/_ ( ))? ( _/_ ) 

- Prove the chain rule 

   - _P A ∩ B ∩ C P A P B A P C AB_ . ( ) = ( ) ( _/_ ) ( _/_ ( )) 

HW: Prove the chain rule for conditional probability given by 

_P_ ( _A_ 1 _∩ A_ 2 _. . . An_ ) = _P_ ( _A_ 1) _P_ ( _A_ 2 _/A_ 1) _P_ ( _A_ 3 _/A_ 1 _A_ 2) _. . . P_ ( _An/An−_ 1 _. . . A_ 1) _._ 

40 / 71 

## – Conditional probability Examples 

- Suppose you draw 4 cards from a deck at random without replacement. What is the probability that (in order) these cards are 9 of club, 8 of diamond, king of spade and king of club? 

- What if you do the above with replacement? 

- Consider a finite sample space Ωwhere each outcome is equally likely. Then what is _P_ ( _B/A_ )? 

- _P B A[|][A][∩][B][|]_ ( _/_ ) = _|A|_[.] 

41 / 71 

## Law of total probability 

- _A A ∩ B ∪ A ∩ B[c]_ What is _P A_ = ( ) ( ). ( )? 

- _P A P A ∩ B P A ∩ B[c]_ ( ) = ( ) + ( ). 

- This is same as _P A P A B P B P A B[c] P B[c]_ ( ) = ( _/_ ) ( ) + ( _/_ ) ( ). 

- This formula is useful when _P_ ( _A_ ) is not given or is difficult to find but _P_ ( _B_ ) or _P_ ( _A/B_ ) is readily available. 

Let _B B B_ be the of the Ω. 1 _,_ 2 _, . . . n_ partition sample space Then for event _A_ we have any 

_n n P A P A ∩ B P A B P B ._ ( ) = ( _i_ ) = ( _/ i_ ) ( _i_ ) X X _i_ =1 _i_ =1 

42 / 71 

## Example 1 

- I have 3 that contain M marbles. _i_ has _R_ red and bags Bag _i_ 

- _B_ blue marbles _i_ = 1 2 _i_ respectively (for _, ,_ 3). 

- I choose a bag at random and then draw a marble. What is the probability that the chosen marble is red ? 

▶ Solution: _P_ ( _Red_ ) =[P] _i[P]_[(] _[Red][/][B][i]_[)] _[P]_[(] _[B][i]_[)] 

43 / 71 

## Example 2 

1. If an item is defective, a robot can spot it with 98% accuracy. 

2. If an item is not defective, a robot will declare it so with 99% accuracy. 

3. A total of 0.1% items are defective. 

4. If the robot that the item drew at random is says you 

defective, what is the probability that the robot is correct? 

▶ _P_ robot (defective _/_ says defective) = 

_P_ robot defective defective _P_ defective ( says _/_ ) ( ) _P_ ~~robot defective~~ ( ~~says~~ ) 

- What is _P_ (robot says defective)? 

44 / 71 

## Bayes rule revisited 

Let _B B B_ be the of the Ω. 1 _,_ 2 _, . . . n_ partition sample space Then for any event _A_ with _P_ ( _A_ ) _>_ 0 we have 

**==> picture [334 x 58] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
P ( A/Bj ) P ( Bj )<br>P ( Bj /A ) = n<br>P i =1 [P] [(] [A][/][B][i] [)] [P] [(] [B][i] [)] [.]<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


In the marble example, given that the marble drawn is red, what is the probability that bag 1 was chosen ? 

45 / 71 

